In this lecture, we are going to learn what is the difference between Jenkins freestyle project and
pipeline jobs.
So every time you click this new item, you are presented with this menu where you have to select the
type of your job.
The two main types of the jobs are freestyle project and pipeline.
So what are the differences?
Let's actually understand this with an example.
So I have a freestyle job open on the left and a pipeline job opened on the right.
At first glance everything looks very similar, but if you scroll down the freestyle job under the build
step, you can only select one of these actions.
So let's say you want to execute a shell command.
You can click this and then you can type in Echo Hollow and then you can add another build step, but
you can only select from the selection that's given here.
Let's say I want to invoke Ansible playbooks.
I selected that and then I can fill all this up on the right side on the pipeline job.
The superpower is you can actually input a script.
So in this script you can define what actions you want to take.
So beyond what's available on the freestyle sample job with pipeline jobs, you can do a lot more things.
And one of the most powerful feature of Jenkins is using Jenkins file.
So Jenkins file basically tells the Jenkins job what to do if I have to compare this.
Think of it as like an infrastructure as code.
So instead of you selecting stuff on the console, you can stitch together different stages and different
steps and you could do a lot more.
So this is what happens in the Real World Project because once you have a Jenkins file, it is easier
to fashion, control it, change it, revert back, test it, rather than selecting stuff from the build
step.
Another advantage of pipeline jobs is you can restart the job from in between.
So let's say a multiple steps or multiple stages and it fills in between and you can restart the Jenkins
job from that step.
But whereas on the freestyle jobs, you cannot really restart from the middle, you have to restart
from the start.
But if you have just like one step, something simple, freestyle is the way to go.
But in any real world projects, a pipeline is what it's used.
Another difference is on the left, on the output of sample freestyle job, there is really no graphical
representation.
So you can just go to the console output which shows the log for the job.
On the right.
We are doing the same thing and don't worry, we're going to go for the demo, how to create the sample
freestyle job and the pipeline job.
But just to give you an idea, you can see it gives a nice gooey feel.
So for Pipeline, all this, these two are different stages.
It kind of shows how much time each stage took and if, let's say the second stage stage failed, you
could have restarted it much easier.
You can just display the logs of this stage.
But on the left for the sample freestyle job, you cannot really do any of this stuff.
Another point is you saw on the build step, there are only certain things that you can select, but
for pipeline jobs, there are lot more things that you could do and if you want, you can even insert
your own groove code.
So a lot more flexibility with pipeline jobs compared to freestyle jobs.
All right.
Now that you understand the difference between freestyle and pipeline job, let's check them out in
action in the next lecture.